Pd 1808 write instances tutorial (#3654)
truenas/documentation: content/SCALETutorials/Instances/_index.md

{{< include file="/static/includes/25.04Virtualization.md" >}}

> **Instances** allow users to configure Incus-based containers or VMs in TrueNAS.

Author: Why? It is included (more than once) in the snippet above. Adding it again here would be unnecessary repetition and increase maintenance needed when the feature stabilizes.

{{< expand "What system resources do instances require?" "v" >}}
{{< include file="/static/includes/ScaleVMReqResources.md" >}}
{{< /expand >}}

## Setting Up the Instances Service

You must choose a pool before you can deploy an instance.
The **Instances** screen header displays a <i class="fa fa-cog" aria-hidden="true"></i> **Pool is not selected** status before a pool for instances is selected.
See [Choosing the Instances Pool](#choosing-the-instances-pool) below for more information about pool selection.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/InstancesPoolNotSelected.png" alt="Pool Is Not Selected" id="Pool Is Not Selected" >}}

After setting the pool, <i class="fa fa-check" aria-hidden="true" title="Check"></i> **Initialized** shows on the screen header.

For more information on screens and screen functions, refer to the UI Reference article on [Instances Screens]({{< relref "/SCALEUIReference/InstancesScreens.md" >}}).

Use the **Configuration** dropdown to access the **[Global Settings](#configuring-global-settings)**, **[Manage Volumes](#managing-volumes)**, and [**Map User/Group IDs**](#mapping-user-and-group-ids) options.

> ### Configuring Global Settings

Author: I disagree. Configuring Global Settings, Managing Volumes, and Mapping User and Group IDs are all sub-sections of Setting Up the Instances Service

Use these options to configure the [storage pool](#choosing-the-instances-pool) for instances and [network settings](#configuring-the-default-network).

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/InstancesGlobalSettingsScreen.png" alt="Global Settings Screen" id="Global Settings Screen" >}}

#### Choosing the Instances Pool

You must set the pool before you can add any instances.

Use the use the **Pool** dropdown to select the pool and click **Save**.

We recommend users keep the VM and container use case in mind when choosing an instances pool.
Select a pool with enough storage space for all the instances you intend to host.

For stability and performance, we recommend using SSD/NVMe storage for the instances pool due to their faster speed and resilience for repeated read/writes.

<!-- Placeholder: Further description of the instances storage implementation here (once implementation is nailed down and experimental status removed) -->

To select a different pool for instances to use, use the **Pool** dropdown to select a different pool.

> Select **[Disabled]** to deselect the active pool and disable the instances service.

Author: ```suggestion
Select **[Disabled]** to deactivate the pool and disable the instances service.
```

#### Configuring the Default Network

> Use the **Default Network** settings to define how instances connect to the network.

Author: ```suggestion
Use the **Default Network** settings on  the **Global Settings** screen to define how instances connect to the network.
```

These settings apply to all new containers and VMs, unless configured otherwise.  

> Select **Automatic** for **Bridge** to use the default network bridge for communication between instances and the TrueNAS host.

Author: No, you misunderstood. If you select automatic, you are not selecting a bridge.

What about
```suggestion
Select **Automatic** from the **Bridge** dropdown list to use the default network bridge for communication between instances and the TrueNAS host.
```

> To specify an existing bridge, select one from the dropdown list.

Author: Not needed if we use the previous change.

{{< expand "Image Filename Requirements" "v" >}}
{{< include file="/static/includes/InstanceImageFilenames.md" >}}

This ensures the instance name works without conflicts in DNS records, the file system, security profiles, and as the instance hostname.
See [Instance name requirements](https://linuxcontainers.org/incus/docs/main/reference/instance_properties/#instance-name-requirements) from Incus for more information.
{{< /expand >}}

#### Deleting Volumes

Click **Configuration > Manage Volumes** to access the **Volumes** screen.
Click <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Delete">delete</i> on an volume row to delete that volume.
The **Delete volume** dialog displays.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/InstancesDeleteVolume.png" alt="Delete Volume Dialog" id="Delete Volume Dialog" >}}

Select **Confirm** and then click **Continue** to delete the image.
TrueNAS disables the delete icon for active images to prevent accidental deletion.

### Mapping User and Group IDs

Click **Map User/Group IDs** on the **Configuration** menu to open the **Map User and Group IDs** screen, which allows you to manually configure UID and GID mappings inside instances.

> By default, user and group accounts within an instance are assigned UIDs and GIDs from a special private range starting at `2147000001`.

Author: ```suggestion
By default, user and group accounts within an instance are assigned UIDs and GIDs from a special private range starting at **2147000001**.
```

This mapping ensures security isolation for containers.
However, you can override these mappings to meet specific system requirements.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/MapUserGroupIDs.png" alt="Map User and Group IDs Screen" id="Map User and Group IDs Screen" >}}

Select **Users** or **Groups** to view mappings for individual user or group accounts, respectively.

Existing mappings are shown in a table containing the user or group name, host ID, and instance ID.
Click **<i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Delete">delete</i> Delete** on a row to delete that mapping.

To configure a new mapping, type an account name to search for it or select it from the dropdown menu.
Select **Map to the same UID/GID in the instance** to directly map the host ID to the same ID in instances.
This means that the selected user or group ID on the host appears as the same ID in instances.

> Deselect **Map to the same UID/GID in the instance** to define a different instance ID for the user or group.

Author: ```suggestion
Disable **Map to the same UID/GID in the instance** to define a different instance ID for the user or group.
```

Enter an ID number to map in instances, for example *1000*.
This means that the selected user or group ID on the host appears as the configured ID in instances.

Click **Set** to create the mapping.
Changes take effect immediately, though instances can require a restart to reflect the changes.

Incorrect mappings can create permission issues within instances.

## Creating Instances

Click **Create New Instance** on the **Instances** screen to open the **Create Instance** configuration wizard with the settings to set up a new [container](#creating-a-container) or [virtual machine](#creating-a-virtual-machine).

### Creating a Container

To create a new container, from the **Create Instance** screen:

> 1. Configure the **Instance Configuration** settings.

Author: This suggestion is less clear though. We're not configuring all instance settings in this step, we're configuring the settings in the **Instance Configuration** section

> 1. Configure the **Instance Configuration** settings.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Configure the instance configuration settings.
```

   {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/InstanceConfigurationContainer.png" alt="Instance Configuration - Container" id="Instance Configuration - Container" >}}

>    a. Enter a name for the container.

Author: added in separate commit

>    b. Select **Container** as the **Virtualization Method**.

Author: There is no dropdown list if you're looking at the screen. There is a Virtualization Method section containing two cards that work like fancy checkboxes.

   c. Click **Browse Catalog** to open the **Select Image** screen.

      {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/SelectImage.png" alt="Select Image Screen" id="Select Image Screen" >}}

      Search or browse to choose a Linux image from [linuxcontainers.org](https://linuxcontainers.org/).
      Click **Select** in the row for your desired image.

2. (Optional) Configure the **CPU & Memory** settings.

   {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/CreateInstanceCPUandMemory.png" alt="CPU & Memory - Container" id="CPU & Memory - Container" >}}

>    For containers, **CPU Configuration** and **Memory Size** can be configured or left blank to allow the container access to all host CPU and memory resources.

Author: ```suggestion
   For containers, enter values for **CPU Configuration** and **Memory Size** or leave blank to allow the container access to all host CPU and memory resources.
```

   To configure resource allocation:

   {{< include file="/static/includes/InstanceCPUMemoryProcedure.md" >}}

> 3. (Optional) Configure the **Environment** settings.
>    Use these settings to configure optional environment variables to run on boot or execute.

Author: No, that's not quite right.

```suggestion
3. (Optional) Configure environment variables to run on boot or execute.
```

      To use an existing volume, enter a path or browse to select an existing dataset or zvol from the **Source** dropdown list.

   c. Enter the filesystem **Destination** path to mount the disk at in the container, for example */media* or */var/lib/data*.

   d. Click **Add** again to mount additional storage volumes.

5. (Optional) Configure **Proxies** settings to forward network connections between the host and the container.
   This routes traffic from a specific address on the host to an address inside the instance, or vice versa, allowing the instance to connect externally through the host.

   {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/CreateInstanceProxies.png" alt="Proxies" id="Proxies" >}}

   a. Click **Add** to display a set of proxy configuration settings.

   b. Select the **Host Protocol** to set the connection protocol for the TrueNAS host.
      Options are **TCP** or **UDP**.

   c. Enter the **Host Port** to define the TrueNAS port to map to the instance port on the container, for example *3600*.

   d. Select the **Instance Protocol** to set the connection protocol for the container.
      Options are **TCP** or **UDP**.

>    e. Enter the **Instance Port** to define the port number within the container that the host port is mapped to, for example *80*.

Author: What about this?

```suggestion
   e. Enter the port number within the container to map to the host port in **Instance Port**, for example *80*.```

         - Click **Import Zvols** on the **Volumes** screen opens the **Import Zvol** dialog.

            {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/InstanceImportZvol.png" alt="Import Zvol Dialog" id="Import Zvol Dialog" >}}

            Enter a path in **Select Zvols** or browse to select an existing Zvol.

            Select **Clone** to clone and promote a temporary snapshot of the zvol into a custom storage volume.
            This option retains the original zvol while creating an identical copy as an instances volume.
            Select **Move** to relocate the existing zvol to the ix-virt dataset as a volume.

            Use this option to migrate a previously configured VM, such as after updating from TrueNAS 24.10.
            See [Migrating Virtual Machines](https://www.truenas.com/docs/scale/25.04/gettingstarted/scalereleasenotes/#migrating-virtual-machines) from the 25.04 release notes for more information.

         - Click **Upload ISO** to open a file browser and select an <file>.iso</file> file from your client computer.
            Locate your desired image file and then click **Open** to upload the file for use in instances.

> 2. Configure the **CPU & Memory** settings.

Reviewer: don't use the section header as the noun in the action. you can make this 
```suggestion
2. Configure the CPU and memory settings.
```
or do something like this
```suggestion
2. Configure the CPU and memory settings in the  **CPU & Memory** section.
```

   Compare the recommended specifications for the guest operating system with your available host system resources when allocating CPU and memory resources.

   {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/CreateVMCPUandMemory.png" alt="CPU & Memory - VM" id="CPU & Memory - VM" >}}

   For VMs, CPU and memory configuration is required.

   {{< include file="/static/includes/InstanceCPUMemoryProcedure.md" >}}

> 3. Configure the **Disks** settings to mount storage volumes for the VM.

Reviewer: Same comment about the section header as the noun.
```suggestion
3. Configure disks settings to mount storage volumes for the VM.
```
you can also say something like this
```suggestion
3. Configure disk settings to mount storage volumes for the VM in the **Disks** section.
```

   For VMs, you must specify the I/O bus and size of the root disk.
   You can also mount one or more existing zvol(s) as additional storage, if needed.
   See [Storage volume types](https://linuxcontainers.org/incus/docs/main/explanation/storage/#storage-volume-types) from Incus for more information.

   {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/CreateInstanceDisksVM.png" alt="Disks - VM" id="Disks - VM" >}}

   a. Choose the root disk I/O bus type that best suits system needs. Options are:

      - **NVMe** – Ideal for high-performance storage with faster read and write speeds.

      - **Virtio-BLK** – Efficient for virtualized environments, offering direct block device access with lower overhead.

      - **Virtio-SCSI** – Flexible and scalable, supporting advanced features like hot-swapping and multiple devices.

> 

Reviewer: To make this read less like UI ref, you can do something like this:
a. Choose the root disk I/O bus type that best suits system needs.
    
   Use **NVMe** for high-performance storage with faster read/write speeds.

   Use **Virtio-BLK** for efficient virtualized environments that need direct block device access with lower overhead.

   Use **Virtio-SCSI for flexible and scalable storage that supports advanced features like hot-swapping and multiple devices.

   b. Enter a plain integer in **Root Disk Size (in GiB)** to configure the size of the VM root disk (default **10**).

   c. To mount additional storage, click **Add** to display a set of fields to mount a zvol.

   d. Enter a path or browse to select an existing zvol from the **Source** dropdown list.

   e. Choose the disk **I/O Bus** type that best suits system needs.
      Options are **NVMe**, **Virtio-BLK**, or **Virtio-SCSI**.

   f. Click **Add** again to mount additional storage volumes.

4. {{< include file="/static/includes/InstanceNetworkProcedure.md" >}}

5. {{< include file="/static/includes/InstanceUSBProcedure.md" >}}

6. {{< include file="/static/includes/InstanceGPUProcedure.md" >}}

> 7. (Optional) Configure **PCI Passthrough** settings to assign physical PCI devices, such as a network card or controller, directly to a VM.

Reviewer: Same comments above about using the section header as the noun.

Author: ```suggestion
7. (Optional) Configure PCI passthrough settings to assign physical PCI devices, such as a network card or controller, directly to a VM.
```

   The selected PCI device(s) cannot be in use by the host or share an IOMMU group with devices the host requires.

   {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/CreateInstancePCI.png" alt="PCI Passthrough" id="PCI Passthrough" >}}

   a. Click **Add PCI Passthrough** to open the **Add PCI Passthrough Device** screen.
      The **Add PCI Passthrough Device** screen lists the available physical PCI devices that can be attached to an instance.

      {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/AddPCIPassthroughDevice.png" alt="Add PCI Passthrough Device Screen" id="Add PCI Passthrough Device Screen" >}}

   b. Use **Search Devices** or the **Type** dropdown to filter available devices.

   c. Click **Select** on a device row to attach that device.

8. (Optional) Configure **VNC** settings to enable VNC access for a VM, configure the VNC port, and set a VNC password for remote access.
   When VNC access is enabled, remote clients can connect to VM display sessions using a VNC client.

   {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/CreateInstanceVNC.png" alt="VNC Settings" id="VNC Settings" >}}

   {{< include file="/static/includes/InstanceVNCProcedure.md" >}}

> 9.  (Optional) Configure the **Security settings** to control various system security features, including Trusted Platform Module (TPM) and Secure Boot options.

Reviewer: settings should not be in bold and same comments as above
```suggestion
9.  (Optional) Configure the **Security** section settings to control various system security features, including Trusted Platform Module (TPM) and secure boot options.
```

Author: Secure Boot is a proper noun

```suggestion
9.  (Optional) Configure the security settings to control various system security features, including Trusted Platform Module (TPM) and Secure Boot options.
```

   These options help to ensure a secure environment by enabling advanced hardware-based security features during system startup and operation.

   {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/CreateInstanceSecurity.png" alt="Security Settings" id="Security Settings" >}}

>    - Select **Add Trusted Platform Module (TPM)** to enable TPM, a hardware-based security feature that protects sensitive data and ensures integrity.

Author: these are two separate options, not procedure steps

>    - Select **Add Trusted Platform Module (TPM)** to enable TPM, a hardware-based security feature that protects sensitive data and ensures integrity.

Reviewer: Reword these then in something like this fashion:
"There are two options:
* Add Trusted Platform (TPM) - Enables TPM, a hardware-based security feature that protect sensitive data and ensure integrity.
* (list next option and the reason to use it)"

Starting each with the verb makes me think I need to do this action. followed by the next action. There are a few ways to better show this beyond the above example.

Stopped instances show the option to start the instance.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/InstancesScreenWithInstances.png" alt="Instances Screen - Populated" id="Instances Screen - Populated" >}}

Select the checkbox to the left of **Name** (select all) or select one or more instance rows to access the [**Bulk Actions**](#using-bulk-actions) dropdown.

Enter the name of an instance in the **Search** field above the **Instances** table to locate a configured instance.

Click <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Restart">restart_alt</i> to restart or <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Stop">stop_circle</i> to stop a running instance.
Click <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Start">play_circle</i> to start a stopped instance.

Select an instance row in the table to populate the **Details for *Instance*** widgets with information and management options for the selected instance.

### Using Bulk Actions

Apply actions to one or more selected instances on your system using **Bulk Actions**.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/InstancesBulkActions.png" alt="Bulk Actions" id="Bulk Actions" >}}

> Use the dropdown to select **Start All Selected**, **Stop All Selected**, and **Restart All Selected**.

Reviewer: do you select all three options or one of the options?

### Editing Instances

After selecting the instance row in the table to populate the **Details for *Instance*** widgets, locate the **General Info** widget.

{{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/GeneralInfoWidget.png" alt="General Info Widget" id="General Info Widget" >}}

Click **Edit** to open the **Edit Instance: *Instance*** screen.
The **Edit Instance: *Instance*** screen settings are a subset of those found on the **Create Instance** screen.
It includes the general **Instance Configuration** and **CPU and Memory** settings for all instances.
Additionally, containers include **Environment** settings and VMs include **VNC** and **Security** settings.

> - Edit the **Instance Configuration** settings to modify basic parameters for the instance, such as startup behavior.

Reviewer: Use numbered lists for procedures not bullet lists for main steps.

Author: Again, I'm not sure that's the best way to handle this. This section is using the Edit screen so it is not a sequential procedure. You can choose to do one or more of these options, depending on which part you need to edit.

Reviewer: When you are giving instructions to do something the user needs to do, then use an ordered list. If the user doesn't need to do the actions listed, then you are just repeating the UI ref content in a "procedure" form (which is okay but user an ordered list). What do they need to do when editing? Do they edit these in a particular order/sequence? Or is this just a general mention of editing an instance? For example" To edit the instance, click **Edit** to open the **Edit Instance** screen. Make the desired changes, order you enter changes does not matter. Click **Save**" would cover this step. If however, there are particular things they should change in a particular order then listing all the steps is beneficial. Users generally migrate to the steps they do and the numbers help them cut to the chase.

Reviewer: Thought on this one. How about making the bullet points under this H4s. This would be consistent with the parallel construction of the sections above and would take some of the bullet points out of this. For example, replace bullet point here this way (one option):

#### Edit Instance Configuration Settings

<image here>

Select **Autostart** to automatically start the instance when the system boots.

#### Edit CPU and Memory Settings

For containers, CPU Configuration and Memory Size can be configured or left blank to allow the container access to all host CPU and memory resources. For VMs, CPU and memory configuration is required.

<image here>

To edit resource allocation:..... then add the steps"

{{< include file="/static/includes/25.04Virtualization.md" >}}

**Instances** allow users to configure Incus-based containers or VMs in TrueNAS.

> *Linux containers*, powered by LXC, offer a lightweight, isolated environment that shares the host system kernel while maintaining its own file system, processes, and network settings.

Reviewer: I didn't catch this the first time but we don't need to use the emphasis for defining a term here by putting Linux containers in italics as it is plain enough to understand with the explanation following it. It is not a big deal but not really needed here.
```suggestion
Linux containers, powered by LXC, offer a lightweight, isolated environment that shares the host system kernel while maintaining its own file system, processes, and network settings.
```

- [Create one or more zvols]({{< relref "/SCALETutorials/Datasets/AddManageZvols.md" >}}) on a storage pool for the virtual disk now or do this from the **Volumes** screen while configuring the instance.

- Compare the recommended specifications for the guest operating system with your available host system resources.
  Reference these when allocating resources to the instance.

{{< /hint >}}

To create a new virtual machine, from the **Create Instance** screen:

1. Configure the instance configuration settings.

   {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/InstanceConfigurationVM.png" alt="Instance Configuration - VM" id="Instance Configuration - VM" >}}

   a. Enter a name for the virtual machine.

      {{< include file="/static/includes/InstanceNameRequirements.md" >}}

   b. Select **VM** as the **Virtualization Method**.

   c. Select one of the available **VM Image Options**: **Use a Linux Image** or **Upload ISO, import a zvol or use another volume**.

      - Selecting **Use a Linux Image**:

>          Select this option to create the VM using a Linux image from [linuxcontainers.org](https://linuxcontainers.org/).

Reviewer: This looks odd when rendered. I suggest combining these two lines into one bullet point, like this as one way to do it:
(it is not letting me use the option to add it so I'll just type it out)

   - Select **Use a Linux Image** to create the vM using a Linux image from [linuxcontainers.org](https://linuxcontainers.org/).

         a. Click **Browse Catalog** to open the **Select Image** screen.

         {{< trueimage src="/images/SCALE/Virtualization/SelectImage.png" alt="Select Image Screen" id="Select Image Screen" >}}

         b. Search or browse to choose an available image.

         c. Click **Select** in the row for your desired image.

>       - Selecting **Upload ISO, import a zvol or use another volume**:

Reviewer: Same comment above, combining line 295 and 297 into one sentence, for example:

 "  - Select **Upload ISO, import a zvol or use another volume** to create the VM using an <file>.iso</file> image, import a zvol from a previously installed vm, or use and existing instance volume.
   Use one of the available options to select or create a volume:"

This should make this section a little more compact and the fewer bullet points helps with the flow.
